New post: How to Build a Website With Eleventy (#1045)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-01-27-build-website-with-eleventy.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "How to Build a Website With Eleventy"
author: nickolas-fisher
by: contractor
communities: [javascript]
description: "A tutorial that shows you how to build a website with Eleventy and Okta."
tags: [eleventy, sign-in-widget, markdown, javascript]
tweets:
- "Curious about @eleven_ty? Learn how to create a secure Eleventy app using @okta! 🤯"
image: blog/build-website-with-eleventy/website-eleventy-social.jpg
type: conversion
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-website-eleventy-example
---

> 11ty is a fantastic tool for quickly creating static sites using a variety of templating languages. 11ty is designed to make designing and developing static sites simple. It supports HTML, Markdown, JavaScript, Nunjucks, Handlebars, and many other template styles. It has built-in support for layouts, pagination, and slugify. 11ty aims to compete against other frameworks such as Jekyll, Hugo, Hexo, Gatsby, and Nuxt. The framework is indeed as simple and powerful as they claim to be. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
11ty is a fantastic tool for quickly creating static sites using a variety of templating languages. 11ty makes designing and developing static sites simple. It supports HTML, Markdown, JavaScript, Nunjucks, Handlebars, and many other template styles, along with built-in support for layouts, pagination, and slugify. 11ty aims to compete against other frameworks such as Jekyll, Hugo, Hexo, Gatsby, and Nuxt. The framework is indeed as simple and powerful as its creators claim. 
```
Avoids repetitious sentence openings, reduces passive voice, avoids ambiguity of closing sentence.

This tutorial will teach how to secure your 11ty site using Okta. 11ty will produce static pages, which means you won't have the luxury of servers and states to help manage your authentication. But Okta still has a solution for this. To authenticate users, you will use the [Okta Sign-In Widget](https://developer.okta.com/code/javascript/okta_sign-in_widget/). Then you will store the `id token` returned from the Okta authentication server. You can then use that `id token` to query Okta's servers for many operations, including [verifying if the token is valid](https://developer.okta.com/docs/reference/api/oidc/#introspect) or obtaining user information.

{% include toc.md %}

**Prerequisites:**

- [Node.js 10 or newer](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)
- [Okta CLI](https://cli.okta.com)

> ## Create your Okta Application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create your Okta application
```
sentence case

{% include setup/cli.md type="spa" framework="Vue"
   loginRedirectUri="http://localhost:8080/callback" signup="false" %}

> ## Create your 11ty Site

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create your 11ty site
```
case

If you wish to follow along using the completed project you can [check out the GitHub repository here](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-website-eleventy-example).  

> The first step is to create your 11ty site. First, create your project directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is to create your 11ty site. Create your project directory.
```
repetition not needed

```console
mkdir okta-website-eleventy-example
cd okta-website-eleventy-example
```

Next, create your node application and install 11ty.

```console
npm init -y
npm install --save-dev @11ty/eleventy@1.0.0
```

At this point, your 11ty site is ready to run. You can test it out by adding a new page.

```console
echo '<!doctype html><html><head><title>Page title</title></head><body><p>Hello World</p></body></html>' > index.html
```

Enter the following command to start 11ty:

```console
npx @11ty/eleventy --serve
```

By default, 11ty will attempt to use port `8080` on localhost, so navigate to `http://localhost:8080`, and you can see your **Hello World** page.  

> **NOTE:** If you are using Windows, you will need to open the index file you just created and resave it with `UTF-8` encoding as 11ty uses `UTF-16 LE` by default.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** If you are using Windows, you will need to open the index file you just created and resave it with `UTF-8` encoding, as 11ty uses `UTF-16 LE` by default.  
```
comma for clarity.

> ## Add a Couple of Static Pages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add a couple of static pages
```
sentence case

 - An index page to greet users (`index.html`)
 - A login page (`login.html`)
 - A readme to demonstrate the usage of markdown (`README.md`)
 - A page that is under authentication (`protected.html`)

First, open the `index.html` file you just created and replace the code with the following.

```html
---
layout: _layout_unauthenticated.11ty.js
---

<div class="row align-items-md-stretch">
    <div class="col-md-12">
        <div class="h-100 p-5 text-white bg-secondary rounded-3">
            <h2>Using Okta with 11ty</h2>
            <p>A small tutorial on writing static sites with 
                <a class="text-dark" href="https://www.11ty.dev/" target="_blank">11ty</a>, 
                secured by <a class="text-dark" href="https://www.okta.com/" target="_blank">Okta</a>
                written by <a class="text-dark" href="https://profile.fishbowlllc.com/" target="_blank">Nik Fisher.</a>
            </p>
            <a class="btn btn-outline-light" role="button" href="Login">Login Now</a>
            <a class="btn btn-light" role="button" href="README">README</a>
        </div>
    </div>
</div>
```

> You will notice the `layout` variable at the top of the file. You have not added this file to your project yet and will need to do that later. But you can assign the layout page to this file, so you don't have to add it later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will notice the `layout` variable at the top of the file. You have not added this file to your project yet and will need to do that. But you can assign the layout page to this file, so you don't have to add it later.
```
avoids repetition.

Next, create a file for `login.html` and add the following code.

```html
---
layout: _layout_unauthenticated.11ty.js
---

<div id="okta-login-container"></div>
<script>
  oktaSignIn.authClient.token.getUserInfo().then(function(user) {
    window.location='/protected';
  },function(error) {
    oktaSignIn.showSignInToGetTokens({
      el: '#okta-login-container'
    }).then(function(tokens) {
      oktaSignIn.authClient.tokenManager.setTokens(tokens);
      oktaSignIn.remove();
      window.location='/protected';
    }).catch(function(err) {
      console.error(err);
    });
  });
</script>
```

> The only HTML in this page here is a `div` with `id="okta-login-container"`. You call the `OktaSignIn` features and display the login screen to the user using the JavaScript code on this page. Okta will create the login form and handle the actual authentication. All you need to do is call the `showSignInToGetTokens` method and handle the promise to set the token using the `tokenManager`. Once you have done that, you will redirect the user to the `protected` page. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only HTML in this page here is a `div` with `id="okta-login-container"`. You call the `OktaSignIn` features and display the login screen to the user with the JavaScript code on this page. Okta will create the login form and handle the actual authentication. All you need to do is call the `showSignInToGetTokens` method and handle the promise to set the token using the `tokenManager`. Once you have done that, you will redirect the user to the `protected` page. 
```
avoids the "...user using..." combo, which could be confusing.

> The only HTML in this page here is a `div` with `id="okta-login-container"`. You call the `OktaSignIn` features and display the login screen to the user using the JavaScript code on this page. Okta will create the login form and handle the actual authentication. All you need to do is call the `showSignInToGetTokens` method and handle the promise to set the token using the `tokenManager`. Once you have done that, you will redirect the user to the `protected` page. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only HTML in this page here is a `div` with `id="okta-login-container"`. You call the `OktaSignIn` features and display the login screen to the user with the JavaScript code on this page. Okta will create the login form and handle the actual authentication. All you need to do is call the `showSignInToGetTokens` method and handle the promise to set the token using the `tokenManager`. Once you have done that, you will redirect the user to the `protected` page. 
```
avoids "user using" which can be confusing...

You can add the `protected.html` page now. Add the following code to it.

```html
---
layout: _layout_authenticated.11ty.js
---

<div id="content"></div>

<script>
    function loadPage(){
        //replace with API call 
        document.getElementById('content').innerHTML = "<h2>Congrats</h2><h5>You've reached a protected page</h5>"
    }
</script>
```

> Since you haven't seen the `_layout_authenticated.11ty.js` page yet, this will need some explanation. After verifying the user has is authenticated, the `loadPage` function is called by the layout.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since you haven't seen the `_layout_authenticated.11ty.js` page yet, this will need some explanation. After verifying that the user has authenticated, the `loadPage` function is called by the layout.  
```
typo

There's a comment to replace the code here with an API call. You can add an API call to verify the ID token on the server-side before displaying any content to the user.

Finally, add a page for `README.md` and add the following markdown to it.

```markdown
---
layout: _layout_unauthenticated.11ty.js
---

> # Okta Eleventy Website Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Okta Eleventy website example
```
sentence case

This repository shows you how to use Okta on a static site built with 11ty.

**Prerequisites:**

- [Node.js 10 or newer](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)
- [Okta CLI](https://cli.okta.com)
```

> This is a truncated version of the [README file](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-website-eleventy-example/blob/master/README.md) that you can see in the GitHub repository for this project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `README.md`you've just added is a truncated version of the [README file](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-website-eleventy-example/blob/master/README.md) that you can see in the GitHub repository for this project.
```
removes ambiguity

> ## Add Layout Pages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add layout pages
```
case

        integrity="sha384-ka7Sk0Gln4gmtz2MlQnikT1wXgYsOg+OMhuP+IlRH9sENBO0LRn5q+8nbTov4+1p"
        crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
    <script src="https://global.oktacdn.com/okta-signin-widget/5.14.1/js/okta-sign-in.min.js"
        type="text/javascript"></script>
    <link href="https://global.oktacdn.com/okta-signin-widget/5.14.1/css/okta-sign-in.min.css" type="text/css"
        rel="stylesheet" />
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
    <title>${data.title}</title>
</head>

<body>

    <script type="text/javascript">
        const oktaSignIn=new OktaSignIn({
            baseUrl: "https://{{yourOktaDomain}}",
            redirectUri: 'http://localhost:8080/callback',
            clientId: "{{yourClientId}}",
            authParams: {
                issuer: "https://{{yourOktaDomain}}/oauth2/default"
            }
        });     
    </script>
    <div class="container">
        ${data.content}
    </div>

</body>

</html>`;
};
```
{% endraw %}

Be sure to replace the placeholder variables with your actual Okta information.

> This file will be the base layout for all of your pages.  This file loads `bootstrap` into all of your pages.  It also initializes the `OktaSignIn` widget on each page.  This way, you can access it in the javascript of your file no matter where you are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file will be the base layout for all of your pages.  It loads `bootstrap` into all of your pages and also initializes the `OktaSignIn` widget on each page.  In this way, you can access it in the JavaScript of your file no matter where you are.
```
avoids the repetltion of "This" to open 3 sentences in a row, and varies the sentence length

> Next, add a file for `_layout_unauthenticated.11ty.js` and add the following code to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, add a file for `_layout_unauthenticated.11ty.js` and then add the following code.
```
avoids closing with "to it"

```javascript
exports.data = {
  title: "11ty And Okta",
  layout:  "_layout_base.11ty.js"
};

exports.render = function (data) {
  return `
     <header class="d-flex flex-wrap align-items-center justify-content-center justify-content-md-between py-3 mb-4 border-bottom">
      <a href="/" class="d-flex align-items-center col-md-3 mb-2 mb-md-0 text-dark text-decoration-none">
       Home
      </a>

      <div class="col-md-3 text-end">
        <button type="button" class="btn btn-outline-primary me-2"><a href="Login">Login</a></button>
      </div>
    </header>

    ${data.content}
        
        `;
};
```

This file extends the base layout you created by creating a header with a `Home` button and a `Login` button that will direct the user to the `Login` page with your Okta sign-in widget.

> Finally, add a new file called `_layout_authenticated.11ty.js`. Add the following code to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, add a new file called `_layout_authenticated.11ty.js`. Then, add the following code.
```
simplify

```javascript
exports.data = {
title: "11ty And Okta",
layout: "_layout_base.11ty.js",
};

exports.render = function (data) {
return `

<header
    class="d-flex flex-wrap align-items-center justify-content-center justify-content-md-between py-3 mb-4 border-bottom">
    <a href="/" class="d-flex align-items-center col-md-3 mb-2 mb-md-0 text-dark text-decoration-none">
        Home
    </a>

    <div class="col-md-3 text-end">
        <button type="button" class="btn btn-outline-primary me-2" onclick='logout()'>Logout</button>
    </div>
</header>

${data.content}

<script type="text/javascript">
    function logout() {
        oktaSignIn.authClient.signOut();
        location.reload();
    }

    if(!oktaSignIn?.authClient?.token) {
        window.location='/Login';
    }

    oktaSignIn.authClient.token.getUserInfo().then(function(user) {
        if(loadPage) {
            loadPage();
        }
    }).catch(function(e) {
        console.log(e);
        window.location='/Login'
    });
</script>
`;
};
```

> Again, this file will extend the base layout. It also adds some additional functionality to each page using this layout. When the page loads, it will attempt to contact the Okta authorization server to obtain information about the user with the ID token stored in the browser. If that request is successful, it will call the `loadPage` function implemented in those pages. Otherwise, it redirects the user to the `Login` page. This page also contains a header with a `Logout` button and a method for `logout` that uses the sign-in widget to log the user out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, this file will extend the base layout, while adding some additional functionality to each page that uses this layout. When the page loads, it will attempt to contact the Okta authorization server for information about the user with the ID token stored in the browser. If the contact request is successful, it will call the `loadPage` function implemented in those pages. Otherwise, the code redirects the user to the `Login` page. This page also contains a header with a `Logout` button and a method for `logout` that uses the sign-in widget to log the user out.
```
attempts to clarify what "it" refers to, and simplify the sequence of steps. Please verify for accuracy

## Start your 11ty website

> If you are still running the site, then 11ty would have hot reloaded the site, and you should see the home page. If not, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are still running the site, then 11ty will have hot reloaded the site, and you should see the home page. If not, run the following command:
```
verb tense

```console
npx @11ty/eleventy --serve
```

The command will build your templates into static pages and then serve the site on `localhost:8080`. Navigate to `http://localhost:8080` to see the home page.

{% img blog/build-website-with-eleventy/home-page.png alt:"Home Page" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> Next, click the login button to see the Okta Sign-in widget in action. You can log in with your Okta credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, click the login button to see the Okta Sign-In Widget in action. You can log in with your Okta credentials.
```
capitalization of product name - Okta Sign-In Widget

{% img blog/build-website-with-eleventy/login-page.png alt:"Login Page" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

If everything goes well, you should see the protected page.

{% img blog/build-website-with-eleventy/protected-page.png alt:"Protected Page" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

## Learn more about working with 11ty

11ty is an excellent tool for building static websites using several different templating languages. Together with Okta, you can create secure static sites easily and quickly.  

> In this article, you learned how to write static pages with HTML and Markdown and use 11ty to convert pages into a static site. You learned how to create a page under authentication and protect it using Okta's sign-in widget. Finally, you learned how to use 11ty's layout feature to streamline your coding experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, you learned how to write static pages with HTML and Markdown and use 11ty to convert pages into a static site. Then you saw how to create a page under authentication and protect it using Okta's Sign-In Widget. Finally, I showed how you can use 11ty's layout feature to streamline your coding experience.
```
varied verbs / avoids repetition
